Today I want to talk to you about stage
fright.
>> Yippee.
>> And or performance anxiety. Um I want to
start off with what is it? What what do
what do you experience in it? What have
you learned about it?
>> Mhm. I see stage fright slperformance
anxiety as the um anxiety that shows up
before um before public speaking,
presenting to a board, presenting to
your um board of directors or getting on
stage like classic stage fright. It's
the anxiety and the the overwhelming
almost shutdown of the system before
doing something public. I saw your hands
like come up and it almost looks like
this whole tightening of the chest. I'm
curious how it you've experienced it and
what you've gone through with it.
>> Yeah, it's a very personal subject
matter for me cuz it was in a way my
intro to all of this work
>> was I was an actor. I had been doing
film and then I was segueing in LA to
stage and I started getting stage fright
and panic attacks. I had two panic
attacks in the ocean swimming usually
before like opening nights.
>> And how it hit me was just this
overwhelming sense of anxiety. Like I I
couldn't hold it in my body. It was
debilitating and um really made work
thoroughly unenjoyable and it was like
this this sense of complete overwhelm in
my nervous system.
>> That sounds intense.
>> It was intense. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Where did that lead you? Well, it
to a lot of retreats,
>> okay,
>> a lot of studying, a lot of therapy, a
lot of studying with elders, working
fear and anxiety and performance
anxiety, stage fright everywhere I
could, and really learned how to um see
through it intellectually, physically
with the body, and work with the nervous
system so that it didn't um it didn't
kill my career. That's sounds really
profound honestly because it's one of
those things where
I would never have guessed I could even
be on a podcast like this talking to you
cuz when I first met you I was just
terrified terrified of being seen. And
so there's something again that feels
very personal of like right I remember
acutely that experience of please don't
look at me. I I don't want to be seen. I
don't want to be here. And I'm sure a
lot of people have this. So, it's very
relatable. And I'm I'm curious what's
the value of even working with it? Like
there's there's something where I I have
a quote that um comes up. It's from
Seinfeld of all places where he says,
"The number one fear is public speaking.
The number two fear is death, which
means you'd rather be in the casket than
doing the eulogy." Oh my god. just like
>> I feel like this. I'm like, it's going
to kill me. I'd rather be dead. I'd
rather be dead than do this.
>> So good.
[Music]
Welcome back to The Art of
Accomplishment, where we explore living
the life you want with enjoyment and
ease. I'm Tara Howley and today I'm here
with my co-host and amazing facilitator,
co-f facilitator Janine Parzi Ali.
>> Hey Tara.
>> Hi Janine.
>> Tara, why should I handle my stage
fright? How why is this worth it?
>> The benefit of working with stage fright
is so that you can go do the things you
dream of doing. who can um you know
raise money for your startup or speak to
the board or speak to the team or run a
meeting at work or
um go on stage or you know become a
stand-up comic whatever it is your
dreams it's worth doing it so that you
can fulfill your dreams if they in some
way require being in front of an
audience or making a presentation that
makes you nervous
>> and there's a beautiful energy in it.
There's a way to transform it and it's
like quite alchemical like transforming
[__] into gold.
>> H say a little bit more about
uh what that journey is like. What does
that even mean to transform it?
>> It would be working with the anxiety,
working with the freeze, working with
the nervous system, with the body
shutdown, whatever your symptoms are,
learning how to work with it. So instead
of it shutting you down, you're working
with it intellectually, emotionally,
nervous system to use the energy to
propel you into the thing you want to
do.
>> That sounds really exciting.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I I want to try some of that.
>> Yes. Yes. Great. Um so the the first and
and the easiest and the one that I just
love doing
is to um reframe the fear as excitement,
>> right? And this is the this is sort of
like the preparation phase because I'm
curious to hear that before during after
of of stage, right?
>> Yes.
>> Like okay, so before and you're freaking
out before.
>> Before you're freaking out and there's a
reframe and um Gay and Katie Hendris
teach this that you can take fear. Fear
is just excitement without the breath.
So you can simply start breathing into
it like I'm scared. I'm scared. I'm
scared. Breathing
>> and then
reframe it as excitement.
And it's literally just to take all that
frozen energy and like I'm excited. I'm
excited. I'm excited. I'm excited. I'm
excited.
I'm excited. I'm excited. I'm excited.
I'm excited. Okay. I feel silly and
goofy.
>> We're pumping our hands over our heads.
And you know, that's funny. It's like I
feel like I'm the cheerleader that I
maybe loathed as a kid, but I'm also
like It's nice. It breaks through the I
feel silly instead of stuck.
>> Exact. and you've intellectually
reframed from fear and anxiety to
excitement
>> and you've taken the the parasympathetic
system and started moving it and all of
that like blood leaving the head
>> is now you've moved the hands like sent
the blood back to the head so you can
start thinking
>> that's true
>> and you've just moved fear into
excitement and it becomes like feel your
body now it becomes quite pleasurable
there's something of I've moved my body
like I I'm giving myself permission to
shake the energy that is definitely
there has built up. It's um almost like
a
>> if I think of an electrical charge that
wants to discharge.
>> Yes.
>> It's like oh it wants to go somewhere.
>> That's exactly right. And for me I would
get overwhelmed
>> and the overwhelm would lead to freeze
and in doing the I'm excited I'm
excited. I'm excited. I could discharge
that too much energy so that I wasn't so
overwhelmed and I could work with what
was there. And during COVID, I worked
with a lot of executives who were
suddenly had no problem presenting to a
room of people in a team, but when they
went online on Zoom, they suddenly
froze. And I would just have them under
under the table moving their hands
before they got on their Zoom call. Just
two minutes with deep breathing of
moving the hands. We're like flicking
our wrists. And it feels Well, again, it
sort of feels silly like I'm flapping my
hands as if I'm trying to doggy swim.
the fly like little birdie wings.
>> Bird wings.
>> I can get up. I can get up. I can get
up.
>> H. And there is something about even
like letting my breath pant.
>> Yeah.
>> Like
that has a um
[Music]
again maybe a bit of a release to it. Uh
I don't know. It it has a fun. Um yeah,
it's unlocking something. And I do feel
more like I'm closing my eyes right now
and I can feel the movement or the
sensation in my body.
>> Yeah.
>> And that's exactly right. When you
finish closing your eyes,
>> letting yourself have a full soft belly
breath and noticing how the body feels
different.
>> Often times that like zing electrical
energy just feels like it's calmed, it's
flowing
>> and you can kind of come back and be in
the body.
>> In the body. There's something about the
when you said that I'm like right
I feel more calm connected when I get to
be in my body. So what's the difference
of when I'm freezing versus getting to
be in my body?
>> Yeah. I think the freeze a lot of the
time we're either like like kind of
frozen and behind the body or up and out
of the body, but we're not in the body.
We're not with ourselves,
>> right? We've separated from self and
from um other
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. That has me wonder uh what else
one might do to prepare
>> Mhm.
>> in stage fright. Like what what else
could I possibly do knowing that this is
coming? It's coming for me. I'm going to
go do this thing.
>> Yeah. So that's the um body work.
There's one other body piece. Yeah.
Sure. Which is I like um and I learned
this again from acting which is to kind
of move around like I get to be [__]
on stage. Like I get to [__] off anyone
who says I don't. [__] off judgmental
thoughts. [__] off shame. [__] off you
know whoever judged you for being bigger
than normal. Like actually um
>> reclaiming a part of yourself that gets
to go on stage that gets to take control
of a meeting
>> in in big like I [__] get everybody
off my [__] back. I get to be big. I
get to go on stage. I get to [__] do
this thing. Shut up, everyone. Shut up.
Judgment. Shut up. Everyone, [__] off. M
I get to take this space. This is mine.
>> Yeah.
>> I'm allowed to do this. This is great.
Yeah. All right. So, there's a handful
of other things that can help and prep
for our stage frame.
>> Yeah. Definitely. If I know I'm taking
on something big that's going to make me
anxious, I'll cut out coffee, tea,
chocolate, all of those stimulants or
cut them down
>> and adding really nutritious food and um
bananas, potassium richch foods, root
vegetables, grounding foods.
>> So really taking care of yourself
nutrition-wise. Also exercising like
sweaty exercise can give a place for all
of that like to go. So like before
you're getting on stage going and having
a run or doing something sweaty can be
quite useful and the um like cold
showers and themhoff work and breath
work all are super supportive for it.
>> Yeah, I love that. It seems like
everyone has their own
>> tricks and hacks on ground finding
really what works for you is what I'm
hearing in that for the nervous system.
>> Yes, that's exactly right. actually
trying a bunch of different things to
find out what works for you. And then
intellectually there's a handful of
things. One is simply
reframing it. You can call it stage
fright. You can call it performance
anxiety. You can call it anxiety. And
that doesn't help you. If you can
reframe it and call it excitement,
>> literally that reframe like, "Oh, I'm
really excited about uh leading a
presentation. I'm really excited about
speaking to my team. I'm really excited.
Simply reframing it from excite from
fear to excitement can change your um
how your hormones react to the thought.
>> Whoa.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Those two those two uh pathways
are very similar. Right. So just even
naming it out loud. I'm excited.
>> Yes.
>> Can have that shift.
>> And intellectually being like, "Oh, this
is excitement." and experiencing it,
identifying it as excitement as opposed
to fear or stage fright. And I I like
asking the question like, "What's so
scary?" Like, "What are you afraid of?"
Like really figuring out like, "Oh, I'm
afraid I won't raise the money. I'm
afraid identifying the underlying fear.
I'm afraid I'll go on stage and suck.
I'm afraid I'll forget my lines. I'm
afraid the audience will hate me. I'm
afraid I'll forget my speech.
or I won't get the money. I won't get my
goal. And really identifying the fear
and then being like, okay, yeah, so I
might go on stage and forget my lines.
>> I have other actors to help me. I might
have a whole speech and forget my way
midway. I might stumble across my words.
Okay, I'm allowed to be imperfect. It's
creating a compassionate way to speak to
yourself. There's really something
interesting about
normally if I experience a fear I don't
want to be rejected. I don't want people
to think I'm weird or judge me or say
something um about me or not give me the
money or I don't want to make the
mistake. It's like I I'm trying to avoid
it. But what you're actually saying is
you get to embrace that too.
>> Yeah.
>> And then something happens when you
embrace it.
>> Yeah. It's you become gentler on
yourself
>> like the shame also there can be shame
in it. Shame of being seen, shame of
making a mistake. When you embrace it,
there's less space for shame.
>> Yeah. How does shame play with stage
fright or performance anxiety? What's
the relationship in your experience?
>> I think that shame is what
differentiates stage fright from general
fears. It's like, all right, when you're
afraid of a bear attacking you in the
woods, that doesn't have shame involved.
But when you're afraid of speaking,
public speaking or singing in public or
um presenting, there's usually an
element of shame to it,
>> right? And you were also saying
something about self-consciousness as
well.
>> And self-consciousness. Yeah. Yeah.
>> Right. You're you're inherently
self-conscious. Like you like stage
fright doesn't happen without
self-consciousness. like, "Oh, what if I
what if I what if I kind of a
solopcyistic self-consciousness?" And
another intellectual hack there is to
put all your attention on something
else.
>> Like all your attention on your mission
or put all your attention on someone
else, your best friend in the front row
or your co- um founder right across from
you at the table when you speak or your
team me mate who's right on board with
you. Um but putting your attention on
something else, not on yourself. This
feels like the start of the transition
into oh when I step on stage this is
what I can do. I can actually put my
attention on
the people who are really on my team or
index on I know that people have my
back. That's right. And even um picture
yourself at the front of like the prow
of a boat and you have all your everyone
behind you at your back rooting for you
and you put everyone you want back there
like
>> you know all of your heroes and public
speak great public speakers and
oratoraiders and have them or people
who've raised you know done great
fundraising in the past like just put
them all in the back and feel their
support
>> can also help while you're actually
doing it. And breathing can also really
help while you're doing it. If you do go
blank, what often people do is they'll
forget a line or forget where they were
in a speech or what they wanted to say
next and then they hold their breath and
start beating themsel up. When you're
stuck in the mud, the tires start
spinning. The more you hold your breath,
yeah, you're just digging yourself into
the hole more. Whereas if you can go,
oh, that thing's happening.
>> I had told myself those might happen.
It's okay that it's happening and I'm
just going to breathe
>> and feel my body.
Being in the body often can motivate you
to remember what the next thing was. The
breath. I have to say you're like my
model for being in the body in moments
on stage. We've facilitated together a
number of times where I mean a
I'll get into my head sometimes going,
"Oh, I need to prepare. I should have my
notes." And one thing I noticed is when
you're teaching, you're very um it feels
like you have the capacity to remain
very internal like in the body when you
present. And if you've forgotten things,
I know we have this story that goes
around where you had you got had a
concussion.
You went you went skiing, you had a
concussion, and we go do this retreat
and you you outed it. You were like, I
have I'm I'm struggling to remember
things. It's going to happen a lot. And
what I noticed was even when that would
happen, there would be a blip. You'd
misspeak or you'd have a mistake. It
felt like a permission to just be human
with you of like, oh, that doesn't need
to even be perceived as a failure. It's
just another it's just another piece of
what's in the room.
>> Yes.
>> And I imagine like when you're acting,
you must forget lines all the time.
>> All the time.
>> Like, okay, how do you weave that into
something magical?
>> Yeah. And I think that people who might
invest in your company or your team, I
think we want to we want to connect with
each other's humanity, not some bigger
than life perfect image. Like we want to
connect with reality and and humanity.
And so, um, yeah, when I when I blubber,
I always mix up my words. I'm like, I
go, there I go mixing up my words again.
I just call it and name it. And it
dshames it for me.
>> And it's like, oh, look, I can laugh at
myself. I'm not teaching the we don't
call this company the art of perfection.
It's the art of accomplishment. Like
you're going to be highly imperfect. So
just naming it and it's like ah have a
good laugh. People connect with it. It's
human. People totally connect with that
too. That sense of oh wait,
you don't have to be so self-conscious
that you can't just be in that humanity,
too. We don't have to disconnect in that
moment.
>> Yeah,
>> that's all right. We can all just be
here with you. And oh, you forgot your
words. Okay. and we have a laugh like
that like all right.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. It brings a certain
realness and sweetness to it.
>> I actually think that on stage when
something happens or an actor forgets
their lines. It's a gift. And I think
that um happens too when speakers are
speaking and they forget where they
were. It's a gift they're giving the
audience of like hanging in the unknown
like what's going to happen here?
They made it. Okay. But they didn't make
it. What's going to happen next? And we
all get to sit in the unknown together.
>> That speaks a little bit to the magic of
what happens in an improvisational
moment where we actually are leaning
into that space of wow, I could be very
afraid of this blip. I could be afraid
of this moment of fright. And actually,
there's an opportunity.
>> Yes. Yes. We I mean, you know, we say
like this could be a dumpster fire. we
actually really invite the chaos like to
permission ourselves like this could go
all to hell and that's okay and I think
that's quite useful with stage fright
there was a a a young aenu actor I
worked with who would get such stage
fright debilitating stage fright that
she would be throwing up backstage and
she actually several nights couldn't
make it onto the stage they had her
understudy come in and she was working
on this we were working on it and she
discovered that she thought she had to
be Merryill Street
>> when she came out and she's 24, 25 years
old and she's basing her um comparing
herself to a woman who's has like three
decades of experience and she realized
like oh she was expecting not just
perfection but beyond expectation
perfection and when she saw that like
I'm allowed to [__] up and that
intellectual like permissioning like I'm
allowed to not do this perfectly let her
get on stage. So yeah, I'm this is we
this could be a dumpster fire
permissioning like this could all go to
[__] That's okay can really help.
There's a really good distinction. It
doesn't mean I'm inviting and want the
dumpster fire to happen. And I am here
for it. I have signed up for whatever
happens here. I trust there's a reason
and it does almost too of right when
that blip happens there could be magic
and I'm going to trust it.
>> Okay. Yeah.
>> And I have prepared. I've given myself
permission. And I am allowed to. All
right, let's see what happens now. Let's
go.
>> Yes. Yeah. It can actually lead to the
beautiful moments, the precious moments.
I saw a perfe I saw a Oh, there I go
again.
>> Nice.
That was amazing.
>> You're welcome. I saw a performance of
The King and I on Mount Tam and it was
windy and the set started falling over
and the actor playing the king, he's
supposed to be an [__] and he just
started yelling at everyone to get the
steps, get the get those back up and it
I this was 20 years ago. I've never
forgotten that moment. Like one of the
greatest moments in theater ever because
something real happened and he had to
respond in real time and it was like the
whole audience was like, "Oh [__]
what's going to happen?" And then he
pulled out.
>> He's like, "I'm the king."
>> He's like, "I'm the king." He's like
barking at everybody. It was it was
genius.
>> And that's that that's available to us
when we're facilitating a retreat, when
we're leading a meeting, when we're
making a presentation.
>> Used to almost say pray for an accident.
Like pray for a [__] It's a gift.
>> I love that orientation, too, of oh,
there's that there's the the layer of I
want to prepare.
It sounded like prepare to the point
that my body has the calm it needs.
>> Oh yeah. I for if you're having stage
fright, for sure prepare the prepare
until your body is like, "Okay, I got
it. I know what I'm going to say." And
give yourself all the support you need.
If you need a cheat sheet, if you need
notes, like you get the if you're
presenting, you get those.
>> Yeah.
>> Like give yourself all the support you
need and prepare. Prepare until your
body's like, "Okay, I got it. It's in
the body.
>> It's in the body." And so now when the
mistake comes, I'm also prepared for the
opportunity of that.
>> And prepare for the mistake. Like a
mistake is going to happen.
>> It is impossible to be perfect.
Impossible.
>> Right.
>> Like pray for it.
>> That's an extra step for sure.
>> That's bonus points.
>> Bonus points for prayer. Yes. So then
you're on stage, you're going through
it, you've got those moments and my So
sometimes I have full body reactions
like my palms start to sweat.
>> Oh yeah. I smell my own sweat. I I'm I'm
I can feel my voice getting a little bit
off.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And so all of those
nervous system level things. What do you
recommend in that moment? What what
happens for stage fright?
>> So it's great the sweaty palms. It's
like think how much can you enjoy sweaty
palms?
>> Like when else do sweaty palms happen
when it's enjoyable? Usually when you're
holding hands with your lover in a movie
theater or walking around like how much
can you enjoy those physiological
reactions would be the first thing
>> and um c can you breathe and go oh my
hands are really sweaty that's cool
>> that that means I have a lot of energy
to get through this.
>> Yeah.
>> Or oh my voice is getting high. What do
what do I need a breath?
when I would start teaching in the early
days, my voice would always be really up
here cuz I was like excited and nervous
and excited and nervous. Um, so how do
you bring it down? And what I like to
do, and when you're teaching, you can do
this. If you're on stage, you can't
really pull it off, but I like naming
like, "Oh my god, I'm really excited to
be here right now. I'm really nervous
about this." And that instantly
>> changes things.
>> But if you're on stage, you can even go,
"Oh, I'm really I'm really I'm excited
and I'm nervous right now." internally
say it and acknowledging it, not trying,
not resisting it, not fighting it, not
trying to make it go away in the moment,
but embracing it like, "Oh, this is
what's here. Great. This gets to be
here. I get to be nervous on stage."
Usually instantly changes the reaction
to it. Yeah. There's a really big
difference to the way we are describing
that relationship to stage fright versus
um I feel like there's the classic
examples I've heard and this might just
be in like the the greater lexicon of
overcome the fear. Conquer the stage
fright. How do I beat it? How do I make
it go away please?
>> This feels terrible and I really don't
want to feel it.
>> I want to acknowledge it does feel
terrible. I have had a stage fright. I
have had panic attacks. does feel
terrible and it's how do you support
yourself first of all in it I will still
get anxiety before I'm doing something
new I'm suddenly going to teach a class
with a hundred people or um do different
work with a different team than I've
ever done and I'll feel the little like
>> and I'll give like what do I need the
day before what's the downtime what's
the walk in nature the hike or a hot
bath that I need beforehand what does my
body need my nervous system need
afterwards to reregulate and come down.
Mine is always like go into nature.
>> Yeah.
>> And exercise like you know a gentle walk
>> or a hike.
>> Yeah. I like that on the back end. What
do I need on the back end too? Because
so um as a as a recovering perfectionist
but also the overachiever type. It's
like I will push my way through an
experience and just be glad I survived
it rather than celebrate the fact that
that just happened. That was this was
great. we're, you know, we're recording
a podcast today and I get to celebrate
on the back end that it was so good. It
was great. It went well. That experience
too of, oh yeah, what's going to be the
the piece for my nervous system, my body
on the back end.
>> And the celebration, that's a really key
piece like, yeah, did it
>> did it. Yeah.
>> Well done.
>> That's right. And, you know, I've seen
you even do um in our company, you ran
an exercise where you even celebrated
when it didn't go well.
>> Oh, yeah. celebrating all I mean you
that's how we learn and learn from our
mistakes like they're to be applauded
and celebrated and welcomed and
otherwise we're not going to grow from
it.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Like if we're beating ourselves
up from our mistakes we're not going to
get the wisdom like oh what did work?
What didn't work? How do we make that
happen again? How do we make that not
happen again? How do we learn from this?
There's so much information in it.
>> Yeah. There's something about Oh, right.
So when I experience that stage fright,
the freeze, the thing that went off,
getting to be seen and celebrated in the
learning on the other end, that really
can shift to I feel like I've learned so
much in my own arc because you, Joe,
everyone just celebrates that was
learning. You're learning. Of course,
you're not going to be Merryill Street.
You're going to be where you are.
>> Yes. And like that is it's the learner's
mindset, right? How do we really
uh compassionately adopt a learner's
mindset for ourselves so that we are
always learning
>> because we're never going to get rid of
it. I haven't gotten rid of it and I've
worked on this for three decades like
how do we reframe it so that we can
welcome it and you use it as well
because there is a a wisdom in stage
fright. There's a real gift in it. I
talked about you could take like [__]
and turn it into gold
>> and the get this comes from an actor
actually I worked with who was having
like debilitating stage fright
>> and at some point he called well into a
run and he was like Tara now I get
nervous if I don't have stage fright cuz
it's all that it gives me all this
energy to get through the show and if I
don't start getting you know the
butterflies around 5 o'clock what do I
do?
>> So perfect. This is my fuel. I need the
fuel actually. This is good that there's
a really big reframe there.
>> It is. It's like a little fuel cell.
Stage fright is a fuel cell to get you
through getting on stage in front of 500
people or making a presentation to the
board or raising money, doing the song
and pony dance show to raise money.
>> It's the fuel cell to get you through
and um and get your cause through and
your message through.
>> So, how do we reframe it so we get
excited about it and welcome it?
>> So, we're going to end with of course
stage, right? We're excited about it.
We're excited. We want it.
So good.
>> So good. It is so good. It feels so
good.
>> Feels very good.
[Music]